# Ruby Hashes

A Hash is a collection of key-value pairs like this: "employee" = > "salary". It is similar to an Array, except that indexing is done via arbitrary keys of any object type, not an integer index.

The order in which you traverse a hash by either key or value may seem arbitrary and will generally not be in the insertion order. If you attempt to access a hash with a key that does not exist, the method will return nil.

## Creating Hashes
As with arrays, there is a variety of ways to create hashes. You can create an empty hash with the new class method −
```
months = Hash.new
```
You can also use new to create a hash with a default value, which is otherwise just nil −
```
months = Hash.new( "month" )
```
or
```
months = Hash.new "month"
```
When you access any key in a hash that has a default value, if the key or value doesn't exist, accessing the hash will return the default value −
```
#!/usr/bin/ruby

months = Hash.new( "month" )

puts "#{months[0]}"
puts "#{months[72]}"
```
This will produce the following result −
```
month
month
```
```
#!/usr/bin/ruby

H = Hash["a" => 100, "b" => 200]

puts "#{H['a']}"
puts "#{H['b']}"
```
This will produce the following result −
```
100
200
```
You can use any Ruby object as a key or value, even an array, so the following example is a valid one −
```
[1,"jan"] => "January"
```

## Hash Built-in Methods
We need to have an instance of Hash object to call a Hash method. As we have seen, following is the way to create an instance of Hash object −
```
Hash[[key =>|, value]* ] or

Hash.new [or] Hash.new(obj) [or]
Hash.new { |hash, key| block }
```
This will return a new hash populated with the given objects. Now using the created object, we can call any available instance methods. For example −
```
#!/usr/bin/ruby

$, = ", "
months = Hash.new( "month" )
months = {"1" => "January", "2" => "February"}

keys = months.keys
puts "#{keys}"
```
This will produce the following result −
```
["1", "2"]
```
Following are the public hash methods (assuming hash is an array object) −
```
hash == other_hash
```
Tests whether two hashes are equal, based on whether they have the same number of key-value pairs, and whether the key-value pairs match the corresponding pair in each hash.
```
hash.[key]
```
Using a key, references a value from hash. If the key is not found, returns a default value.
```
hash.[key] = value
```
Associates the value given by value with the key given by key.
```
hash.clear
```
Removes all key-value pairs from hash.
```
hash.default(key = nil)
```
Returns the default value for hash, nil if not set by default=. ([] returns a default value if the key does not exist in hash.)
```
hash.default = obj
```
Sets a default value for hash.
```
hash.default_proc
```
Returns a block if hash was created by a block.
```
hash.delete(key)
```
or
```
array.delete(key) { |key| block }
```
Deletes a key-value pair from hash by key. If block is used, returns the result of a block if pair is not found. Compare delete_if.
```
hash.delete_if { |key,value| block }
```
Deletes a key-value pair from hash for every pair the block evaluates to true.
```
hash.each { |key,value| block }
```
Iterates over hash, calling the block once for each key, passing the key-value as a two-element array.
```
hash.each_key { |key| block }
```
Iterates over hash, calling the block once for each key, passing key as a parameter.
```
hash.each_key { |key_value_array| block }
```
Iterates over hash, calling the block once for each key, passing the key and value as parameters.
```
hash.each_key { |value| block }
```
Iterates over hash, calling the block once for each key, passing value as a parameter.
```
hash.empty?
```
Tests whether hash is empty (contains no key-value pairs), returning true or false.
```
hash.fetch(key [, default] )
```
or
```
hash.fetch(key) { | key | block }
```
Returns a value from hash for the given key. If the key can't be found, and there are no other arguments, it raises an IndexError exception; if default is given, it is returned; if the optional block is specified, its result is returned.
```
hash.has_key?(key)
```
or
```
hash.include?(key)
```
or
```
hash.key?(key)
```
or
```
hash.member?(key)
```

Tests whether a given key is present in hash, returning true or false.
```
hash.has_value?(value)
```
Tests whether hash contains the given value.
```
hash.index(value)
```
Returns the key for the given value in hash, nil if no matching value is found.
```
hash.indexes(keys)
```
Returns a new array consisting of values for the given key(s). Will insert the default value for keys that are not found. This method is deprecated. Use select.
```
hash.indices(keys)
```
Returns a new array consisting of values for the given key(s). Will insert the default value for keys that are not found. This method is deprecated. Use select.
```
hash.inspect
```
Returns a pretty print string version of hash.
```
hash.invert
```
Creates a new hash, inverting keys and values from hash; that is, in the new hash, the keys from hash become values and values become keys.
```
hash.keys
```
Creates a new array with keys from hash.
```
hash.length
```
Returns the size or length of hash as an integer.
```
hash.merge(other_hash)
```
or
```
hash.merge(other_hash) { |key, oldval, newval| block }
```
Returns a new hash containing the contents of hash and other_hash, overwriting pairs in hash with duplicate keys with those from other_hash.
```
hash.merge!(other_hash)
```
or
```
hash.merge!(other_hash) { |key, oldval, newval| block }
```
Same as merge, but changes are done in place.
```
hash.rehash
```
Rebuilds hash based on the current values for each key. If values have changed since they were inserted, this method reindexes hash.
```
hash.reject { |key, value| block }
```
Creates a new hash for every pair the block evaluates to true
```
hash.reject! { |key, value| block }
```
Same as reject, but changes are made in place.
```
hash.replace(other_hash)
```
Replaces the contents of hash with the contents of other_hash.
```
hash.select { |key, value| block }
```
Returns a new array consisting of key-value pairs from hash for which the block returns true.
```
hash.shift
```
Removes a key-value pair from hash, returning it as a two-element array.
```
hash.size
```
Returns the size or length of hash as an integer.
```
hash.sort
```
Converts hash to a two-dimensional array containing arrays of key-value pairs, then sorts it as an array.
```
hash.store(key, value)
```
Stores a key-value pair in hash.
```
hash.to_a
```
Creates a two-dimensional array from hash. Each key/value pair is converted to an array, and all these arrays are stored in a containing array.
```
hash.to_hash
```
Returns hash (self).
```
hash.to_s
```
Converts hash to an array, then converts that array to a string.
```
hash.update(other_hash)
```
or
```
hash.update(other_hash) {|key, oldval, newval| block}
```
Returns a new hash containing the contents of hash and other_hash, overwriting pairs in hash with duplicate keys with those from other_hash.
```
hash.value?(value)
```
Tests whether hash contains the given value.
```
hash.values
```
Returns a new array containing all the values of hash.
```
hash.values_at(obj, ...)
```
Returns a new array containing the values from hash that are associated with the given key or keys.

# References
https://www.tutorialspoint.com/ruby/ruby_hashes.htm
