# C++ Storage Classes

A storage class defines the scope (visibility) and life-time of variables and/or functions within a C++ Program. These specifiers precede the type that they modify. There are following storage classes, which can be used in a C++ Program

-   auto
-   register
-   static
-   extern
-   mutable

The auto Storage Class
----------------------

The auto storage class is the default storage class for all local variables.
```
{
   int mount;
   auto int month;
}
```
The example above defines two variables with the same storage class, auto can only be used within functions, i.e., local variables.

The register Storage Class
--------------------------

The register storage class is used to define local variables that should be stored in a register instead of RAM. This means that the variable has a maximum size equal to the register size (usually one word) and can't have the unary '&' operator applied to it (as it does not have a memory location).
```
{
   register int  miles;
}
```
The register should only be used for variables that require quick access such as counters. It should also be noted that defining 'register' does not mean that the variable will be stored in a register. It means that it MIGHT be stored in a register depending on hardware and implementation restrictions.

The static Storage Class
------------------------

The static storage class instructs the compiler to keep a local variable in existence during the life-time of the program instead of creating and destroying it each time it comes into and goes out of scope. Therefore, making local variables static allows them to maintain their values between function calls.

The static modifier may also be applied to global variables. When this is done, it causes that variable's scope to be restricted to the file in which it is declared.

In C++, when static is used on a class data member, it causes only one copy of that member to be shared by all objects of its class.

```
#include <iostream>

// Function declaration
void func(void);

static int count = 10; /* Global variable */

main() {
   while(count--) {
      func();
   }

   return 0;
}

// Function definition
void func( void ) {
   static int i = 5; // local static variable
   i++;
   std::cout << "i is " << i ;
   std::cout << " and count is " << count << std::endl;
}
```
When the above code is compiled and executed, it produces the following result -
```
i is 6 and count is 9
i is 7 and count is 8
i is 8 and count is 7
i is 9 and count is 6
i is 10 and count is 5
i is 11 and count is 4
i is 12 and count is 3
i is 13 and count is 2
i is 14 and count is 1
i is 15 and count is 0
```

The extern Storage Class
------------------------

The extern storage class is used to give a reference of a global variable that is visible to ALL the program files. When you use 'extern' the variable cannot be initialized as all it does is point the variable name at a storage location that has been previously defined.

When you have multiple files and you define a global variable or function, which will be used in other files also, then *extern* will be used in another file to give reference of defined variable or function. Just for understanding *extern *is used to declare a global variable or function in another file.

The extern modifier is most commonly used when there are two or more files sharing the same global variables or functions as explained below.

### First File: main.cpp

```
#include <iostream>
int count ;
extern void write_extern();

main() {
   count = 5;
   write_extern();
}
```
### Second File: support.cpp
```
#include <iostream>

extern int count;

void write_extern(void) {
   std::cout << "Count is " << count << std::endl;
}
```
Here, *extern* keyword is being used to declare count in another file. Now compile these two files as follows -
```
$g++ main.cpp support.cpp -o write
```
This will produce write executable program, try to execute write and check the result as follows -
```
$./write
5
```
The extern keyword in C and C++ extends the visibility of variables and functions across multiple source files.

In the case of functions, the `extern` keyword is used implicitly. But with variables, you have to use the keyword explicitly.

### extern with Functions
In the example, I have two C++ files named main.cpp and math.cpp and a header file named math.h. Code for the math.h file is as follows:
```
int sum(int a, int b);
```
As you can see, the header file contains the declaration for a simple function called sum that takes two integers as parameters. The code for the math.cpp file is as follows:
```
int sum(int a, int b) {
    return a + b;
}
```
This file contains the definition for the previously declared sum function and it returns the sum of the given parameters as an integer.

Finally, the code for the main.cpp file is as follows:
```
#include <iostream>
#include "math.h"

int main () {
    std::cout << sum(10, 8) << std::endl;
}
```
This file includes the math.h header file containing the declaration for the sum function. Then inside the main function, the `std::cout << sum(10, 8) << std::endl;` statement calls the sum functions by passing 10 and 8 as the two parameters and prints out whatever the returned value is.

Now if you try to compile this program you'll see it compiles without any problem and upon executing the resultant binary file, you'll see following output in the console:
```
18
```
This works (even though the definition of the sum function is in a separate file than main.cpp) because all the functions in C/C++ are declared as extern. This means they can be invoked from any source file in the whole program.

You can declare the function as extern int sum(int a, int b) instead but this will only cause redundancy.

### extern with Variables
Although the extern keyword is applied implicitly to all the functions in a C/C++ program, the variables behave a bit differently.

Before I dive into the usage of extern with variables, I would like to clarify the difference between declaring a variable and defining it.

Declaring a variable simply declares the existence of the variable to the program. It tells the compiler that a variable of a certain type exists somewhere in the code. You declare a float variable as follows:
```
float pi;
```
At this point, the variable doesn't have any memory allocated to it. The compiler only knows that a float variable named pi exists somewhere in the code.

Defining the variable, on the other hand, means declaring the existence of the variable, as well as allocating the necessary memory for it. You define a variable as follows:
```
float pi = 3.1416;
```
You can declare a variable as many times as you want, but you can define a variable only once. This is because you can not allocate memory to the same variable multiple times.

Now, I'll modify the math.h header file created in the previous section to contain the declaration for the pi variable as follows:
```
extern float pi;
int sum(int a, int b);
```
As you can see, the variable has been declared as an extern in the header file, which means this should be accessible anywhere in the program. Next, I'll update the main.cpp file as follows:
```
#include <iostream>
#include "math.h"

int main () {
    std::cout << pi << std::endl;
    std::cout << sum(10, 8) << std::endl;
}
```
I've added a new std::cout statement to print out the value of the pi variable. If you try to compile this program at this point, the compilation process will fail.
```
Starting build...
C:\mingw64\bin\g++.exe -fdiagnostics-color=always -g C:\Users\shovi\repos\cpp-playground\extern\*.cpp -o C:\Users\shovi\repos\cpp-playground\extern\extern.exe
c:/mingw64/bin/../lib/gcc/x86_64-w64-mingw32/11.2.0/../../../../x86_64-w64-mingw32/bin/ld.exe: C:\Users\shovi\AppData\Local\Temp\ccFIWkmh.o:main.cpp:(.rdata$.refptr.pi[.refptr.pi]+0x0): undefined reference to `pi'
collect2.exe: error: ld returned 1 exit status

Build finished with error(s).
```
This happens because, declaring the variable has let the compiler know that this variable exists somewhere in the program – but in reality it doesn't. It has no memory allocation at all.

To get out of this problem, I'll define the pi variable inside the math.cpp file as follows:
```
float pi = 3.1416;

int sum(int a, int b) {
    return a + b;
}
```
The compilation process finishes without any issues, and if I execute the resultant binary, I'll see the following output in my console:
```
3.1416
18
```
Since the pi variable has been declared as an extern and has been defined within the math.cpp file, the main.cpp file is able to access the value of pi without any problem at all.

You can define the variable anywhere in the program but I chose the math.cpp file for definition to prove the point that this extern variable indeed is available to all the other source files as well.

The mutable Storage Class
-------------------------

The mutable specifier applies only to class objects, which are discussed later in this tutorial. It allows a member of an object to override const member function. That is, a mutable member can be modified by a const member function.

# References
https://www.tutorialspoint.com/cplusplus/cpp_storage_classes.htm
